Updates to upgrade guides for 1.4 (#2646)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/migration/versions/04-upgrading-to-v1.4.md

---

> title: "Upgrading to v1.4 (latest)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Upgrading to v1.4 (prerelease)"
```

> description: New features and breaking changes for dbt Core v1.4

Reviewer: Suggest remove "breaking changes," just given the note below. There shouldn't be any breaking changes, but some changes that might require some action/awareness upon upgrading, in ways that we've communicated + set expectations around :)
```suggestion
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.4
```

---
### Resources

- [Changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/1.3.latest/CHANGELOG.md)
- [CLI Installation guide](/docs/get-started/installation)
- [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud)

> ## Breaking changes

Reviewer: As discussed offline: Let's retitle this from `Breaking changes` to `What to know before upgrading` — and let's do the same rename for all migration guides v1.1-v1.3

The manifest schema version has updated to `v8`.
These changes are relevant for users who:
- parse or analyze the contents of the `manifest.json` file
- have custom code accessing the [`model`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/model) or [`graph`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/graph) variables. For example:

```
{{ model.root_path }}
```

Relevant changes are: 
- The `root_path` attribute is removed for all nodes to reduce duplicative information.
- Unused attributes have been removed from seed `nodes`, including `depends_on`, and from `macros`, including `tags`.
- The `unique_id` of docs blocks now start with `doc` for consistency with other resource types.

## New and changed documentation

- [Python 3.11](/faqs/Core/install-python-compatibility) was released in October 2022. It is officially supported in dbt-core v1.4, though full support depends also on your data platform adapter plugin.
According to the Python maintainers, "Python 3.11 is between 10-60% faster than Python 3.10." We encourage you to try a `dbt parse` with dbt Core v1.4 + Python 3.11, and compare it to the result of dbt parse on dbt Core v1.3 + Python 3.10.

> - Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments (such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets), packages now support [installing from internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages). 

Author: ```suggestion
- Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments (such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets), packages now support [installing from internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages#Internally-hosted-tarball-URL). 
```

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.4 (prerelease)"
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.4
---
### Resources

- [Changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/1.4.latest/CHANGELOG.md)
- [CLI Installation guide](/docs/get-started/installation)
- [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud)

## What to know before upgrading

> We are committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x. If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dbt Labs is committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x. If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).
```

### For consumers of dbt artifacts (metadata)

The manifest schema version has updated to `v8`.

> These changes are relevant for users who:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These changes are relevant for people who:
```

Author: The docs I've read so far are "users" or "developers" sometimes "admins." What is your rule of thumb for when to use people vs. one of those?

> - parse/analyze contents of `manifest.json`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- parse or analyze the contents of the `manifest.json` file
```

- have custom code accessing the [`model`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/model) or [`graph`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/graph) variables. For example:

```
{{ model.root_path }}
```

> **Relevant changes:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Relevant changes are: 
```

> - The `root_path` attribute is removed for all nodes, to reduce duplicative information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `root_path` attribute is removed for all nodes to reduce duplicative information.
```

- Unused attributes have been removed from seed `nodes`, including `depends_on`, and from `macros`, including `tags`.

> - The `unique_id` of docs blocks now start with `doc`, for consistency with other resource types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `unique_id` of docs blocks now start with `doc` for consistency with other resource types.
```

> - Docs blocks unique IDs now start with `doc` for consistency. 

Reviewer 2: should this line be removed? not sure what's different about this from the previous list item

Author: That's on me.  Brain fog let me enter the same note twice. Thanks!

> - Docs blocks unique IDs now start with `doc` for consistency. 

Author: ```suggestion 
```

## New and changed documentation

> - **[Python 3.11](/faqs/Core/install-python-compatibility)** was released in October 2022. It is officially supported in dbt-core v1.4, though full support depends also on your data platform adapter plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Python 3.11](/faqs/Core/install-python-compatibility) was released in October 2022. It is officially supported in dbt-core v1.4, though full support depends also on your data platform adapter plugin.
```

According to the Python maintainers, "Python 3.11 is between 10-60% faster than Python 3.10." We encourage you to try a `dbt parse` with dbt Core v1.4 + Python 3.11, and compare it to the result of dbt parse on dbt Core v1.3 + Python 3.10.

> - [Install packages from tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages) &mdash; Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets, installing packages now support **[internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages)**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments (such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets), packages now support [installing from internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages). 
```

Reviewer 2: would be awesome if we could link to the section about tarball instead of the top of the page with `/docs/build/packages`

> - **The [local_md5](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/local-md5)** context variable is a new Jinja function that calculates an [MD5 hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [local_md5](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/local-md5) context variable is a new Jinja function that calculates an [MD5 hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5).
```

> - **[Exposures](/docs/build/exposures)** can now depend on `metrics`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Exposures](/docs/build/exposures) can now depend on `metrics`.
```

- [Coming soon] `--favor-state` ([dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2021](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2021))
- [Coming soon] `incremental_predicates` ([dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2636](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2636))
- [Coming soon] BigQuery: `time_ingestion_partitioning` + `insert_overwrite` ([dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2426](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2426))

### Updates to Python models

> - **[Stored procedures](/docs/build/python-models##Specific-data-platforms)** for Python models will be enabled for all dbt + Snowpark Python models starting with the release of dbt Core version 1.4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Stored procedures](/docs/build/python-models##Specific-data-platforms) for Python models will be enabled for all dbt + Snowpark Python models starting with the release of dbt Core version 1.4.
```

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.4 (prerelease)"
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.4
---
### Resources

> - [Changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/1.3.latest/CHANGELOG.md)

Reviewer: This branch doesn't exist yet, but when we cut the RC tomorrow, we'll also be creating a `1.4.latest` branch:
```suggestion
- [Changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/1.4.latest/CHANGELOG.md)
```
For now, it should just be the `main` branch instead:
```suggestion
- [Changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
```

- [CLI Installation guide](/docs/get-started/installation)
- [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud)

## What to know before upgrading

We are committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x. If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).

### For those on versions .20 or .21

> As of June 30, 2022, dbt Cloud has ceased all support for dbt Core versions older than v1.0. With the release of v1.4, these older versions have been removed from the docs site version menu as well. It is strongly recommded that anyone on a version lower than 1.1 upgrade as soon as possible.

Reviewer 3: making some small suggestions, however i'm taking into account jerco's comment below re: whether this should be in the 1.4 guide.

```suggestion
As of June 30, 2022, dbt Cloud has ceased all support for dbt Core versions older than v1.0. With the release of v1.4, dbt Labs removed the older versions from the version menu on the docs site as well. 

If you're on a version lower than v1.1, it's strongly recommended to upgrade as soon as possible.
```

> Please visit [About dbt Core Versions](/dbt-versions/core) for more information

Reviewer: I don't think this section makes sense here, in the v1.4 upgrade guide.

Official support for these versions from the Core team ended on Dec 3, 2021 (the day v1.0 was released). Official support for these versions in dbt Cloud ended on June 30, 2022. As maintainers of the docs, we're taking the opportunity of the v1.4 release to also officially remove v0.20 + v0.21 from the docs site, but we could have chosen to do it sooner—there's no specific tie back to v1.4. Let me know if you disagree!

Author: If it doesn't make sense to you, it's out! I added it because I'm still learning how our clients read our docs and thought it might help raise awareness and encourage folks to upgrade, but it's 2 pretty old versions so that was a gamble.

### For consumers of dbt artifacts (metadata)

The manifest schema version has updated to `v8`.
These changes are relevant for users who:
- parse/analyze contents of `manifest.json`
- have custom code accessing the [`model`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/model) or [`graph`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/graph) variables. For example:

```
{{ model.root_path }}
```

**Relevant changes:**
- `root_path` removed for all nodes
- remove some irrelevant/unused attributes from seed nodes, including `depends_on`
- macros no longer have `tags`

> - docs blocks unique IDs now start with `doc` for consistency. 

Reviewer: Small recommendation: let's add just a little bit of extra text, to explain the reason for each change
```
- The `root_path` attribute is removed for all nodes, to reduce duplicative information.
- Unused attributes have been removed from seed `nodes`, including `depends_on`, and from `macros`, including `tags`.
- The `unique_id` of docs blocks now start with `doc`, for consistency with other resource types.
```

## New and changed documentation

- **[Python 3.11](/faqs/Core/install-python-compatibility)**  was released in October 2022. It is officially supported in dbt-core v1.4, though full support depends also on your data platform adapter plugin.

> According to the Python maintainers, "Python 3.11 is between 10-60% faster than Python 3.10." We encourage you to try a `dbt parse` with dbt Core v1.4 + Python 3.11, and compare it to the result of dbt parse on dbt Core v1.3 + Python 3.10. If you notice a significant speed increase, let us know!

Reviewer: Let's keep all content grouped together in one bullet, to preserve the appearance of the list

> According to the Python maintainers, "Python 3.11 is between 10-60% faster than Python 3.10." We encourage you to try a `dbt parse` with dbt Core v1.4 + Python 3.11, and compare it to the result of dbt parse on dbt Core v1.3 + Python 3.10. If you notice a significant speed increase, let us know!

Reviewer 3: how can the user let you know? is there a link in the 'let us know' bit at the end? 

>If you notice a significant speed increase, let us know!

Author: Good catch. There was supposed to be an issue there. I'll add it. Thank you!

> - Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets, **[internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages)** are supported for installing packages. 

Reviewer: I try to start the bullet with a quick headline/tagline of what the change is:
> - **[Install packages from tarball URLs](docs/build/packages#internally-hosted-tarball-url):** Some organizations have...

> - Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets, **[internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages)** are supported for installing packages. 

Reviewer 3: active voice and adding jerco's suggestion

```suggestion
- [Install packages from tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages) &mdash; Some organizations have security requirements to pull resources only from internal services. To address the need to install packages from hosted environments such as Artifactory or cloud storage buckets, installing packages now support **[internally hosted tarball URLs](/docs/build/packages)**. 
```

> - **The [local_md5](/referencedbt-jinja-functions/local-md5)** context variable is a new Jinja function that calculates an [MD5 hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The [local_md5](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/local-md5)** context variable is a new Jinja function that calculates an [MD5 hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5).
```
The PR deploy for this will continue to fail because that page does not yet exist. (Docusaurus validates these relative URLs at build time, which you can run locally with `make build`.)

You can merge https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/2658 first, and then update this PR with latest changes from `current` (after it's merged).

- **[Exposures](/docs/build/exposures)** can now depend on `metrics`.
- Placeholder `--favor-state`
- Placeholder `incremental_predicates`

> - Placeholder incremental modeling docs for BigQuery.

Reviewer: Perfectly valid to have these placeholders here! What I've tended to do is link to the open docs issue, so that if prerelease testers are _really_ curious, they can at least click the link which leads them to some information, while waiting on the rest of the docs.

> - [TK] `--favor-state` ([dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2021](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2021))
> - [TK] `incremental_predicates` ([dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2636](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2636))
> - [TK] BigQuery: `time_ingestion_partitioning` + `insert_overwrite` ([dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2426](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2426))

Although it looks like you already have PRs up for some of these :)

### Quick hits

> - **[Stored procedures](/docs/build/python-models##Specific-data-platforms)** for Python models will be enabled for all dbt + Snowpark Python models starting with the release of dbt Core version 1.4.

Reviewer: The "quick hits" thing is something I just came up with for v1.3, to list a bunch of misc changes weren't related to Python models. It's definitely not obligatory, although I do agree that the change you've listed here is very much a "quick hit."

I think we'll want a section here like: "Updates to Python models" (also including any other small changes, e.g. https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/2686, which I just opened)

Author: Perfect, thank you!

Please visit [About dbt Core Versions](/dbt-versions/core) for more information

### For consumers of dbt artifacts (metadata)

The manifest schema version has updated to `v8`.
These changes are relevant for users who:
- parse/analyze contents of `manifest.json`
- have custom code accessing the [`model`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/model) or [`graph`](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/graph) variables. For example:

```
{{ model.root_path }}
```

**Relevant changes:**
- The `root_path` attribute is removed for all nodes, to reduce duplicative information.
- Unused attributes have been removed from seed `nodes`, including `depends_on`, and from `macros`, including `tags`.
- The `unique_id` of docs blocks now start with `doc`, for consistency with other resource types.
- Docs blocks unique IDs now start with `doc` for consistency. 

## New and changed documentation

- **[Python 3.11](/faqs/Core/install-python-compatibility)** was released in October 2022. It is officially supported in dbt-core v1.4, though full support depends also on your data platform adapter plugin.

> According to the Python maintainers, "Python 3.11 is between 10-60% faster than Python 3.10." We encourage you to try a `dbt parse` with dbt Core v1.4 + Python 3.11, and compare it to the result of dbt parse on dbt Core v1.3 + Python 3.10. If you notice a significant speed increase, let us know!

Author: ```suggestion
According to the Python maintainers, "Python 3.11 is between 10-60% faster than Python 3.10." We encourage you to try a `dbt parse` with dbt Core v1.4 + Python 3.11, and compare it to the result of dbt parse on dbt Core v1.3 + Python 3.10.
```
